.. index:: testing
.. index:: production environments

=========================================
Production Systems and Testing Separation
=========================================

The first rule of managing deployments that people actually *use* is:
don't do anything that will affect the availability of the
service. Ever. Once you get something setup and working, *don't touch
anything* and don't break anything. This is a difficult challenge:
maintenance often interrupts service. Any change to a system,
including required configuration changes, upgrades, or system updates
can break a working system. At the same time every deployment and
system requires configuration changes, upgrades and updates. Balancing
these requirements presents a core problem in systems administration.

Ensuring a stable production environment requires appropriate testing
infrastructure *and* sufficient policies and automation around
application deployment to ensure that deploying new software or
running software updates are reliable and do not require manual
intervention.

This document addresses both halves of this problem--the
infrastructure and the policy--and includes different method,
techniques, and strategies that make it possible for administers to
ensure reliable application and system updates.

Key Concepts
------------

The following concepts introduce crucial components and requirements
of deployment testing infrastructure.

.. glossary::
   :sorted:

   production environment
      The servers that clients actually interact
      with. These servers are doing the actual work of the
      deployment. Administrators should modify instances and
      applications running in this environment as minimally as
      possible.

   test environment
      Servers that provide a very accurate reproduction
      of the production environment. Use this as a final testing
      substrate before implementing changes or updates on the
      production system. Sometimes it's not feasible to fully
      replicate production environments in test, but the differences
      ought to be minimal so that differences between the test and
      production environments don't cause unexpected problems.
      Virtualized production and test environments make it
      easier to more accurately replicate the production environment
      in test. Some organizations and resources refer to test
      environments as "staging environments."

   development environment
      A deployment of your application or application for exploratory
      and development use. While these environments resemble the
      production environment, they are often much smaller in terms of
      available resources and data. Development systems are what
      administrators and developers use to test and experiment with
      changes before implementing them in the :term:`test
      environment`. These may run in virtual machines that resemble
      the :term:`test environment`, or on developers laptops.

   change control
      Systems that monitor production environments for changes and
      modifications and alert administrators of intrusions. As a
      result, change control is typically used as a security
      measure. At the same time, sometimes change control can refer to
      policies that control how changes propagate to the production
      systems, and change control tools can be used to enforce
      testing and staging policies. 

   fire call
      A method used by administrators to get emergency administrative
      access in deployments where no individual has "root" or
      administrative access. This both allows emergency work on a
      deployment and works to allow administrators to avoid
      accidentally modifying systems.

   rollback
      Refers to the process of "unwinding" a change applied to a
      production environment, that reverts the environment to a
      previous known working state.

.. index:: testing; infrastructure

Testing Infrastructure
----------------------

Having a secure and reliable testing environment is essential, and
without one its impossible to verify that changes a are "good" before
deploying them. However, the extent of your testing, and the
tolerances based on the administrative requirements and from
stakeholder [#steakholders]_ needs.

When configuring your test environments consider the following basic
requirements:

- Testing needs to be easy. In order to ensure that you and your
  developers will rigorously test changes and updates, testing changes
  needs to be trivially easy. In addition to any other interface, it
  must be easy to restart and reset the environment to "base
  configurations," to "back out" of bad configurations easily.

  Usability in this case also mandates some measure of performance. If
  it takes too long to reset an environment, or if the environment is
  too slow for any number of reasons, test environments are less
  likely to get used.

- Using a deployment automation system, either something custom based
  on build scripts, ``make`` files, or something similar to ensure
  consistency.

- Use virtualization to isolate environments. Tools like "`Vagrant
  <http://vagrantup.com/>`_ great for this purpose (assuming that it
  doesn't take too long to rebuild the test infrastructure.)

.. [#steakholders] While the term "stakeholders," comes to us from
   the world of management and bears a certain amount of distaste in
   the minds of most systems administrators, it's useful to
   be able to recognize where operational needs originate.

   For some services, the administrators are the main consumers or
   stakeholders. Directory services, management tools and databases,
   logging and monitoring systems, and so forth are all primarily used
   to support infrastructure. For other systems: file servers,
   web-based applications, and so forth, other groups dictate
   operational requirements and tolerances.

Deployment Processes and Policy
-------------------------------

Once you have the infrastructure *to* perform testing, it's important
to ensure that you *do* perform tests. Software developers use
:term:`continuous integration` systems to automate tests, and in some
cases you can automate testing for deployments work using a similar
method. Often, the kind of testing that administrators need to do is
more complex.

Where programmers can often write test cases that verify the behavior
of a program, operational testing requires not only that a single
program behave correctly, but rather that an entire collection of
programs behave correctly *together* in a specific environment. In
the process of testing it's important to be able to affirmatively
answer the following questions:

- Will this upgrade or change break any dependent service? For
  example, does upgrading an LDAP (directory) service impact email
  services?

- Does this upgrade or change introduce any (new) client compatibility
  issues? For instance, would switching to :term:`SSL SNI` for HTTPS
  break compatibility with clients that you must support? (In this
  case, as of 2011, the answer is usually yes.)

- Does one change (i.e. deploying a new version of an existing
  application,) require configuration changes (i.e. the installation
  of a library, changes to networking rules, or changes to files
  beyond what's contained in the upgrade itself?

There are a number of different policies at the organizational level
that can help you support testing requirements. Typically these
standards and practices revolve around making testing easier, less
burdensome, more automated, and more integrated into existing
workflows. For instance, consider the following: 

- Mandate reviews and signoffs for changes. Make sure that except for
  :term:`fire call` situations, more than one administrator is
  responsible for reviewing and signing off on any change. This is not
  possible in small teams and for some sets of changes. Also, while
  these multi-sign off policies lengthen timescales considerably fresh
  eyes and different perspectives are quite useful and prevent many
  bugs and issues.

  If you manage configuration and deployment programatically, all
  changes to the production system must be code reviewed before
  propagating it to the production system.

- Integrate testing into other tools and workflows. Including testing
  infrastructure that is either automated (of the "continuous
  integration" type,) connected to change requests and ticketing, or
  integrated with version control tools.

- Provide local preliminary ("dev") testing. If you and your
  developers and administrators have an easy way to test changes, and
  become familiar with software, it's more likely that you and other
  administrators will test code regularly and that you'll do
  experimentation with test and production environments. Lower
  barriers to entry are key to ensuring that developers use these
  systems.

Rollback
--------

Controlling access to resources and providing testing environments is
crucial for maintaining production systems. While there are no
substitutes for implementing policies and procedures to protect
deployments and ensure that updates and upgrades go smoothly, it's
important to provide a :term:`rollback` option when an upgrade has
unforeseen consequences. These allow you to return a deployment to a
previous "known working state," if something breaks.

There are a few methods/technologies that you can use to provide
rollbacks:

- Use :term:`LVM` or some other file-system or block level
  snapshotting tool to create a backup of a system before applying the
  change. If something goes wrong with the upgrade process, you can
  rollback to a previous state.

- If ruining in a virtualized environment, duplicate the instance, and
  upgrade the server, and perform a manual failover (swap the IP
  addresses) if you need a rollback. Ensure that modifying the IP
  address works (i.e. send appropriate ARP requests.)

- Use a script to apply the changes, and write a rollback function to
  reverse all changes that you apply, and test both in your test
  environment.

In general, you should script and automate rollbacks--like deployment
processes--so that it's possible to back out of an update without
needing to remember the sequence of operations that you performed to
update the system. Sometimes this is reasonably complicated, as in the
case of operating system updates and upgrades. In other situations it
may be as simple as changing a symbolic link, as in some application
deployment schemes. Above all, remember to be as rigorous about
rollbacks and testing as you are about the updates themselves.

.. seealso:: ":doc:`backup-strategies`."

.. index:: change control

Change Control
--------------

Change control software monitors systems and applications to insure
that configuration remains constant and that configuration changes are
not implemented outside of normal change policies. This is typically
implemented as a special kind of :term:`monitoring` or intrusion
detection system.

While it's important to develop policies regarding changes to
production systems, it's also important to provide some method to
ensure that the system or systems remain intact and that some
untracked change to the production system don't either impact the
integrity of the system or affect the operational conditions of the
systems. Change control may help you address this requirement.

Change control is a difficult problem, and it's beyond the scope of
this article. As a security practice, it's reactive and reliable
change control is difficult to implement effectively. [#change-control]_
For many (or most) deployments, the kinds of typical intrusion
detection solutions used for change control are overblown.

Even if your deployment does not merit a change control solution,
collecting some "change control data" may be useful. For instance, log
ins and daemon restarts may indicate some tampering, and your logging
and monitoring system should track these events. Also, use privilege
escalation systems like ``sudo`` that provide more logging rather than
shared privileged accounts for administrative tasks.

.. [#change-control] Typically if a user has the access to be able to
   impact a production system, they also have the ability to affect
   the change control monitor itself. Beyond this, change control
   systems cannot *prevent* intrusions or unwanted modifications
   except through Foucauldian methods, and can only report on them
   after the fact.

.. index:: auditing

Policy, Auditing, and Production Testing
----------------------------------------

Maintaining separation between test and production environments, as
well as a usable and reliable deployment systems is not a significant
technological problem: it's a social and policy problem. To properly
address these concerns you need some required infrastructure, but
really need to develop sufficient policies and procedures that make
sense in the context of your environment and that all of your
administrators and operators can work within.

Devising policies that are functional from an administrative use
perspective is a requisite first step, but it's also important to
ensure that the policy is also sufficiently flexible. A rigid policy
may not allow for timely administrative response to unforeseen bugs or
system events, which can be devastating. So called ":term:`fire call`"
systems are useful for providing an emergency exception: again, this
is a thin technological wrapper around a policy problem.

Full-scale auditing is often unworkable: of logs in large clusters, of
file system changes on any system, so while some level of auditing may
be useful for "covering" and protecting your systems, the truth is
that it's not possible to fully audit production and test systems. In
light of this, the most important aspects of maintaining sane
deployment policies and practices are (in descending order:)

#. Make testing infrastructure and systems available and easy to use.

   It's difficult to test effectively if there aren't properly
   configured test machines. Furthermore developers and administrators
   are unlikely to test effectively if the testing system is difficult
   to use.

#. Make sure that testing environments resemble production systems to
   the greatest extent possible.

   The greater the differences between the test environment and the
   production environment, the less effective the test environment
   becomes at predicting what will happen in production.

#. Automate testing.

   For important components use automated testing methods, either with
   continuous integration systems or by some other means, to ensure
   that most routine testing is ongoing and does not require active
   developer initiative.

#. Create and test :term:`rollbacks <rollback>`, to ensure that even
   if an update does not go as planned, it's possible to return to a
   known working state.

#. Limit changes to production systems.

   Use access control systems and monitoring tools to ensure that
   production and testing systems remain consistent and don't drift
   from each other.

.. seealso:: ":doc:`monitoring-tactics`" and ":doc:`documentation`."
